=encoding utf8

=head1 JavaScript backend for Rakudo 

=over 1

=item Name:

Paweł Murias

=item Amount Requested:

USD 5,000

=back

=head2 Synopsis

[A short description]

Improve the JavaScript backend from handling NQP (Not Quite Perl) to full Perl 6.


=head2 Benefits to the Perl Community

[Is this work worth doing? Why should the Perl Community grant
this project?]

A JavaScript backend for Rakudo will allow the use of Perl 6 in many new niches.
The main focus of the grant is to allow Perl 6 to be used for writing the frontend part of single page applications (for the backend part we can use MoarVM).

A side benefit of the grant is that I intend to create a web-based REPL that should allow users to play around with Perl 6 without installing it.
The goal of the grant is provide a JavaScript backend with enough features that the community can start experimenting with what running inside the browser will allow us to accomplish.

While working on the JavaScript backend I write test for the things I'm implementing.
Expanding the test suite will directly help future backend authors.
It also helps anyone doing non trivial changes to the existing backends.
I have found MoarVM and JVM bugs in the past doing that.

=head2 Deliverables

[Quantifiable results e.g. "Improve X modules in ways Y and Z",
"Write 3 articles for X website".]

[If you cannot clearly define the deliverables, you are not quite ready
to submit this.]

=over

=item *

Upload rakudo-js to npm and CPAN.

=item *

Have this rakudo-js be able compile our chosen subset of the 6.c roast (official Perl 6 test suit) to JavaScript and pass them in a modern browser.

=item *

Write a simple REPL in Perl 6 that will run in a modern browser.

=back

=head2 Project Details

[A more detailed description.]

[It will be beneficial to include the progress made to date (if any).
If you aren't the primary maintainer of the project you want funding
for, show that you have endorsement from the primary maintainer.]

Rakudo compiles Perl 6 and NQP (a subset of Perl 6 that Rakudo itself is written in) to an abstract syntax tree form called QAST.
QAST is then passed to either the MoarVM, JVM or JavaScript backends.
Currently the JavaScript backend can only handle AST that is produced from NQP.
The goal of this project is to improve the JavaScript backend to handle the QAST produced from full Perl 6.

I started the original work on the JavaScript backend while Rakudo was transitioning from being a Parrot targeting compiler to a multi-platform one. Parts of the work on the backend was done as parts of a GSoC project.
After the GSoC projects I undertook a rewrite of the backend. The rewrite allowed me to add source maps support and use more type information to generate better code.
The JavaScript backend is now merged in the the master branch of the NQP repo.

After reviewing the initial draft of this grant proposal Jonathan Worthington pointed out that implementing gather/take proved to be tricky on other backends. To reduce this risk I added basic continuations support to the backend. This was enough to run a basic form of gather/take: https://github.com/perl6/nqp/blob/master/t/js/continuations.t#L76 . I implemented this using a CPS transform with a trampoline (to work around the lack of tail call optimization).

Most of Perl 6 is built from smaller building blocks.
This will mean that a large part of the effort will be needed before I get to the point where the test module compiles and the first test passes.
On the other hand when the needed building blocks are implemented correctly I will be able to reuse the quality work that went into Rakudo and the setting.

=head2 Inch-stones

[Break down your project into small chunks. By listing your tasks
adequately, other people will understand you know what you need to do.]

[Try and think in "inch-stones" rather than "mile-stones". Breaking down
your grant into many small goals makes it harder to overlook
difficulties, and easier to see progress as you complete your grant.]

=over


=item *
Cleanup the array handling in nqp-js.

=item * 

Finish up serialization of closures in the nqp-js-running-on-js.

=item *
Go through the MoarVM opcode list and where it's possible write tests for untested opcode and implement them in nqp-js

=item *
Do the obvious speedups for the code generated by nqp-js.

=item *
Compile the meta-model and bootstrap support with nqp-js.

=item *
Implement a bunch of p6 specific ops.

=item *
Get rakudo to compile on nqp-js.

=item *
Get rakudo compiled to js to correctly compile nqp::say("Hello World").

=item *
Get the rakudo setting to compile.

=item *
Get rakudo compiled to js to correctly compile say("Hello World").

=item *
Get Test.pm to correctly compile.

=item *
Pass a first test.

=item *
Go through roast test fixing bugs and implementing missing things to make them pass.

=item *

Get continuations support fully functional.
Get nqp-js to pass test all test in full CPS mode.

=item *
Pass the part of roast we focus on node.js.

=item *
Be able to webpack the generated javascript code.

=item *
Be able to run tests in the browser.

=item *
Pass the part of roast we focus on in a browser.

=item *
Polish up source maps support.

=item *
Implement (and test) interoperablity with javascript code

=item *
Upload rakudo-js on npm.

=item *
Write a simple Perl6 REPL that should run in modern browser.

=item *
Put the REPL on try.perl6.org when the community views it as good enough.

=back

=head2 Project Schedule

The project is expected to take 3 months of full time effort.
I will begin work as soon as the grant gets accepted.
[How long will the project take? When can you begin work?
Be realistic.]

=head2 Report Schedule

I will report on the progress of the grant on a blog at least every two weeks, preferably more often.
I will also keep the #perl6 channel updated on my progress.

=head2 Completeness Criteria

[Describe how your grant can be evaluated. For instance, code will be
merged in Perl tree, or a module will be released to CPAN with the
specified features, etc.]


=over

=item *
    Rakudo-js released on npm

=item *
    Rakudo-js passes our choosen subset of roast

=item *
    A simple Perl 6 REPL running in a modern browser (for evaluation purposes a modern version of Google Chrome)

=back

The backend will be available in the nqp repo at: https://github.com/perl6/nqp/.

=head2 List of tests we want to pass

We want to pass tests from the official Perl 6 Test Suit "Roast".
It can be found on github.com/perl6/roast.

For the purpose of the grant we focus on a subset of those (mainly excluding IO and OS interaction).
Some tests might be broken for reasons outside of the JavaScript backend so that for grant completeness purposes we are only concerned with the tests that pass on the Rakudo MoarVM backend.

We want to pass the tests in the following subdirectories of roast:

=over

=item *

S02-lexical-conventions

=item *

S02-lists

=item *

S02-literals

=item *

S02-magicals

=item *

S02-names

=item *

S02-names-vars

=item *

S02-one-pass-parsing

=item *

S02-packages

=item *

S02-types

=item *

S03-binding

=item *

S03-feeds

=item *

S03-junctions

=item *

S03-metaops

=item *

S03-operators

=item *

S03-sequence

=item *

S03-smartmatch

=item *

S04-blocks-and-statements

=item *

S04-declarations

=item *

S04-exception-handlers

=item *

S04-exceptions

=item *

S04-phasers

=item *

S04-statement-modifiers

=item *

S04-statement-parsing

=item *

S04-statements

=item *

S05-capture

=item *

S05-grammar

=item *

S05-interpolation

=item *

S05-mass

=item *

S05-match

=item *

S05-metachars

=item *

S05-metasyntax

=item *

S05-modifier

=item *

S05-nonstrings

=item *

S05-substitution

=item *

S05-syntactic-categories

=item *

S05-transliteration

=item *

S06-advanced

=item *

S06-currying

=item *

S06-macros

=item *

S06-multi

=item *

S06-operator-overloading

=item *

S06-other

=item *

S06-routine-modifiers

=item *

S06-signature

=item *

S06-traits

=item *

S07-iterators

=item *

S09-autovivification

=item *

S09-hashes

=item *

S09-subscript

=item *

S09-typed-arrays

=item *

S10-packages

=item *

S11-modules

=item *

S12-attributes

=item *

S12-class

=item *

S12-construction

=item *

S12-enums

=item *

S12-introspection

=item *

S12-meta

=item *

S12-methods

=item *

S12-subset

=item *

S12-traits

=item *

S13-overloading

=item *

S13-syntax

=item *

S13-type-casting

=item *

S14-roles

=item *

S14-traits

=item *

S32-array

=item *

S32-basics

=item *

S32-container

=item *

S32-exceptions

=item *

S32-hash

=item *

S32-list

=item *

S32-num

=item *

S32-scalar

=item *

S32-str

=item *

S32-temporal

=item *

S32-trig

=back

=head2 Things not addressed by the scope of the grant

Performance and size of the generated JavaScript code will likely be an important concern before using the backend for serious production use.
While I'll attempt to keep it in mind as it's a very open ended issue it's not the main focus of the grant.
As the feedback from the #perl6 channel seemed to imply webapps are the thing the community is the most interested in, I'm moving IO support while running on node.js outside of the scope of grant.

=head2 Bio

Worked on the mildew/smop/kp6 Perl 6 implementations.
Worked on nqp-js outside of and as part of a Google Summer of Code project.
I have tweaked both the MoarVM and JVM backends so if changes to the whole of NQP are required I will be capable of that.

TODO - expand
[Who are you? What makes you the best person to work on this project?]

[Before submitting this proposal, review it again. Check the POD syntax.
Use a spell checker.  If possible, get it reviewed by someone who
understands the value of your project.]

=cut


